{"State v. Shapiro":"Defendant charged with offense requiring a mental state of “knowingly” argued that the evidencewas insufficient because there was no indication she desired or hoped for a particular result.Held: Conviction affirmed. Although a defendant who acted purposefully or who intended aparticular result certainly acted knowingly, MPC 18-103 makes clear there is no suchrequirement.","State v. Bladow":"Defendant argued that his conviction for aggravated arson MPC 18-402 was not supported by themanifest weight of the evidence and that the State had not offered sufficient evidence of an intentto cause physical harm to another person when he acted. Held: Conviction affirmed. The GeneralAssembly conspicuously used the “knowingly” mens rea in MPC 18-402, not “purposeful” orlanguage that mandates a specific intent to harm. Moreover, all that is needed for a conviction foraggravated arson is “to create a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any person other thanthe offender.” While actual harm is sufficient to satisfy MPC 18-402, it is not a necessaryelement if a substantial risk of serious physical harm is present.","State v. Baker":"As used in MPC 18-402, “substantial risk” means a strong possibility, as contrasted with aremote or significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstancesmay exist.","State v. Abress":"Under MPC 18-402, “serious physical harm to any person” means any injury, illness, or otherphysiological impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration, that carries a substantial risk ofdeath. “Substantial risk” was previously defined by this Court in State v. Baker.","State v. Knox":"As used in MPC 18-402 and 18-403, “create” is synonymous with “cause.” Accordingly,“create” has the same definition as “causation” pursuant to MPC 2-201.","State v. Egloff":"As used in MPC 18-402 and 18-403, “physical harm” means to explode, burn, char, or otherwisedestroy or cause damage to the interior structure of a building (e.g., the foundation, supportbeams, or other apparatus that hold the building up) via fire or explosion. Mere smoke damage orslight charring of a wall does not constitute arson or aggravated arson. Such actions are bettercharged as criminal damaging or vandalism as appropriate.","State v. Schoppman":"As used in MPC 18-403, “defraud” means the act of knowingly obtaining some benefit foroneself or another by deception, or knowingly causing some detriment to another person orentity by deception.","State v. Lazzaro":"Defendant charged with aggravated arson under MPC 18-402(A)(2) argued there was noevidence he knew physical harm to an occupied structure by means of fire was likely to result.Held: Conviction affirmed. The defendant’s responsibility is not limited to the immediate ormost obvious result of the defendant’s act or failure to act. The defendant is also responsible forthe natural and foreseeable results that follow in the ordinary course of events from the act orfailure to act.","State v. Sanford":"Defendant charged with aggravated arson under MPC 18-402(A)(1) for injuries suffered by alaw enforcement officer responding to the scene. Held: Conviction reversed, and case remanded.The trial court failed to instruct the jury on what MPC 18-401(B) means by “any emergencypersonnel who are acting in the course of fighting or investigating the fire.” Here the lawenforcement officer was off duty when she entered the dwelling to save the occupants. As shewas not acting within the scope of her job as emergency personnel when she entered thedwelling, the jury should have been instructed to consider that fact in deciding whether MPC 18401(B) was satisfied.","State v. Weinman":", we hold that “emergency personnel”are within the scope of their employment if they act in substantial compliance with the applicableprofessional code of conduct, rules, or standard operating procedure. While certainly braver thanthe average citizen, they are still human; thus, emergency personnel shall not be held to theimpossible standard of strict compliance with all applicable professional code of conduct, rules,or standard operating procedure while they are dealing with emergency situations.","State v. Ullrich":"Expanding upon our decision in ","State v. French":"Defendant convicted of arson under MPC 18-403(A)(2) argued that the conviction should beoverturned because he did not own the property in question because there was a lien on theproperty. Conviction affirmed. MPC 18-403(A)(2) is conspicuous in its language that theproperty may be the property of the offender or another. Defendant’s argument is not well takenand is overruled.State v. CLAM Rental Properties, Inc. (2021)With respect to Midlands Penal Code 18-403(A), the element “intent to defraud” does notrequire the government to prove fraud occurred. A specific intent crime need not result insuccess of the crime, but merely that the defendant had the intent to commit the wrongful act. Inthis case, overwhelming evidence existed that the property manager set fire to her rentalproperties and then filed a claim for an insurance policy payout. Even though the claim wasdenied, the evidence was sufficient to prove the “intent to defraud” element in 18-403(A).Burden of Proof / Presumption of Innocence","State v. Bainbridge":"In a criminal case, the burden is proof beyond a reasonable doubt with respect to each and everyelement of the charged offense(s). The burden is on the State and never shifts to the defendant.","State v. Thompson":"The State’s burden of proof applies to elements, not discrete facts. The question in every case iswhether cumulative impact of the otherwise-admissible evidence is sufficient to convince thefact finder beyond a reasonable doubt that the element has been proven.","State v. Ball":"A criminal defendant is never required to present evidence or offer an alternative theory of thecrime. If a defendant does so, however, a prosecutor may note the defense’s failure to offerevidence in support of its theory of the case. Such comments do not imply that the burden ofproof has shifted to the defense, nor do they necessarily constitute an infringement on adefendant’s exercise of the right to remain silent.","State v. Arun":"Criminal defendants have a constitutionally protected right to refuse to speak with police officersand to decline to testify in their own defense. No prosecutor or witness may comment (expresslyor implicitly) on a defendant’s exercise of either right or suggest that refusal to testify ortermination of a police interrogation demonstrates consciousness of guilt.","State v. Homel":"It is axiomatic that identification of the defendant is an essential element of the charge in acriminal trial. Whether or not the statute explicitly requires identification as an element of theoffense is a nonstarter. Common law tradition requires the identification of the defendant toassure that the government has not charged the wrong person. Identification is a necessaryfunction to aid the government in its attempt to overcome the presumption of innocence that isafforded every criminal defendant.","State v. Friedman":"In Midlands, all criminal trials are bifurcated with a guilt phase followed by a penalty phase.","State v. Johnson":"During the guilt phase, evidence is not relevant if it is directed solely to the penalty to be given tothe defendant if found guilty. It also is improper for an attorney to comment on sentencing ordiscuss potential penalties during the guilt phase of the trial. Such conduct is grounds for amistrial and may constitute conduct for which sanctions are appropriate.","State v. Chintakayala":"Under Midlands practice, both sides may always present evidence to prove or rebut any elementof a charged offense. Neither side may object to such evidence on the ground that the objectingparty is no longer pursuing (or challenging) the pertinent issue.","State v. Joseph":"Unlike some jurisdictions, MRE 615 allows for the sequestration of the lead investigating officerin a criminal case if that police officer is not elected to be the State’s representative duringpretrial matters.","Kwon v. Mabry":"Civil case arising from alleged assault. The plaintiff was called as a witness and testified fully ondirect examination. On cross examination, however, the plaintiff failed to respond to somequestions, purportedly because of a condition arising from the assault. Held: The judgment forthe plaintiff must be reversed. The reason why the witness failed to respond to questions on crossexamination is immaterial. If a witness becomes unable or unwilling to respond to otherwiseproper questions on cross examination, the trial court must strike the witness’s testimony in itsentirety.Character Evidence","State v. Gaul":"Under MRE 404, general evidence of a defendant’s good character is not admissible. However,under MRE 404(a)(1), a criminal defendant may offer certain evidence of a “pertinent” charactertrait. The requirement that evidence be “pertinent” significantly exceeds the comparably low barof relevancy. “Pertinence” is a more exacting standard by which the trait itself must directlyrelate to a particular element or facet of the crime charged.","State v. Ward":"Given the complex nature of the arson sections of the Midlands Penal Code, the courts have beensplit on what constitutes a “pertinent trait” under MRE 404 and State v. Gaul in arson cases.Accordingly, while this list is not exhaustive and every arson case has different elements andmotives, we find that character traits pertinent to arson cases to include being law-abiding, nonviolent, and a community caretaker.","State v. Threadgill":"Appellants challenge the decision of the district court to allow testimony by the State’s witnessrebutting properly noticed “good character” evidence from the defense under MRE 404(a) duringthe State’s case-in-chief. Due to the lack of rebuttal witnesses in the State of Midlands, our rulesdiffer from other jurisdictions, particularly with respect to the presentation of character evidence.We hold that the language of MRE 404(a) is clear, that if the defense “opens the door, by notingits intention before trial to offer “good character” evidence, the State may use its case in chief tooffer “bad character” evidence of the defendant regarding the same traits enumerated by thedefendant, pursuant to the procedures outlined in MRE 405.","State v. Murray":"MRE 609 does not categorically exclude evidence of a witness’s prior criminal convictionpunishable by less than one year of imprisonment, especially when the offense was a crime ofmoral turpitude like fraud, theft, or other crimes of dishonesty. Such evidence may still beadmissible, subject to the MRE, on a case-by-case basis.","State v. Smith":"In accordance with this Court’s reasoning and holding in the civil action of Estate of Hamilton v.Walton last year, this Court hereby adopts the same reasoning and holding for criminal actions aswell. Testimony about a psychological condition does not constitute “[e]vidence of a person’scharacter or character trait,” the only evidence excluded by MRE 404(a)(1).Grounds and Basis for Evidentiary Rulings","State v. Harper":"The beyond-a-reasonable-doubt burden does not apply to threshold matters involving theadmissibility of evidence. In Midlands, the proponent of evidence need only prove theseevidentiary matters by a preponderance of the evidence (i.e., it must establish that all elementsare more likely than not true).","Demsky v. Jacoby":"Under MRE 104(a), when evaluating the admissibility of evidence, a trial court is permitted torely on both admissible and inadmissible evidence. The use of underlying inadmissible evidencedoes not make that inadmissible evidence admissible. Instead, the court is permitted to considerthe underlying inadmissible evidence to assess the admissibility of the offered evidence. In a jurytrial, the jury may not always be privy to the underlying facts used to determine what evidence isadmissible, but the Court may hear it. Previously upheld examples included using characterevidence to make ruling on hearsay exceptions, using hearsay to make a ruling on characterevidence, and using hearsay to decide whether an expert has adequate foundation to testify.","Somani v. Young":"Under MRE 104(a), courts may consider custodial documents, such as clerks’ certifications oraffidavits of records keepers, when determining the admissibility of other evidence withoutregard for the admissibility of the custodial document itself. The custodial document typicallyonly addresses preliminary matters of admissibility and is not entered into evidence.","State v. Geasey":"This case was taken to settle a circuit split that has arisen in Midlands regarding the applicabilityof MRE 411 in criminal cases. The committee notes for MRE 411 are focused on tort law andavoiding the improper use of a property owner’s insurance coverage to prove negligence orrecklessness claims. While the wording of MRE 411 and the committee notes do not bar the useof the rule in criminal trials, we hold that MRE 411 does not preclude evidence that thedefendant owned an insurance policy or evidence that the policy included a payout for loss ofproperty. Such evidence is admissible as proof of motive. MRE 411’s language would prohibitthe government from drawing an impermissible nexus between mere ownership of an insurancepolicy and an assertion that the defendant must have committed the offense(s) charged.Authentication","Gaskins v. Azari":"As long as the proponent of the statement produces evidence that would permit a reasonable juryto find, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a given person made a particular statement, acourt assessing admissibility must assume that the statement was made by that person.","Ginger v. Heisman":"Absent particularized reason to believe that the communication may have been sent by someoneelse, the fact that an electronic communication (an email, text, or social media post) is listed ascoming from a number or account that is either known or purports to belong to a particularperson is sufficient foundation that the communication was sent by the person.Experts","Davis v. Adams":"Trial judges must ensure that any scientific testimony or evidence admitted is not only relevantbut reliable. In determining reliability, judges should consider only the methods employed andthe data relied upon, not the conclusions themselves. The proponent of the evidence has theburden of proving each section of MRE 702 by a preponderance of the evidence.Tarot Readers Association of Midlands v. Merrell Dow (1994)In assessing reliability under MRE 702(c), judges should consider whether the theory ortechnique has been or can be tested, whether it has been subjected to peer review andpublication, whether it has a known error rate, and whether it has gained widespread acceptancewithin the field. These factors, while relevant, are not necessarily dispositive. For example, lackof publication does not automatically foreclose admission; sometimes well-grounded butinnovative theories will not have been published. There is no definitive checklist. Judges mustmake such assessments based on the totality of the circumstances.Richards v. Mississippi BBQ (1997)Midlands Rule of Evidence 703 does not permit experts to testify or present a chart in a mannerthat simply summarizes inadmissible hearsay without first relating that hearsay to somespecialized knowledge on the expert’s part. The court must distinguish experts relying onotherwise inadmissible hearsay to form scientific conclusions from conduits who merely repeatwhat they are told. The testimony of the former is admissible; that of the latter is not. Of course,statements that would otherwise be admissible are not inadmissible simply because they areoffered by or through an expert witness.","State v. Richardson":"It was not an abuse of discretion for the trial court to allow the forensic pathologist to testify tothe cause and manner of death even though the pathologist was not tendered as an expert prior toproviding her testimony. Unlike other jurisdictions, Midlands does not require a party to “tenderan expert” before eliciting an expert opinion. Whether MRE 702 foundational requirements havebeen satisfied is an evidentiary determination that rests within the sound discretion of the trialcourt.Kane Software Co. v. Mars Investigations (1995)Midlands does not permit parties to use their experts as weapons in a trial by ambush or forunfair surprise. Expert reports that are exchanged prior to trial must contain a complete statementof all opinions the expert will testify to and the basis and reasons for them, the facts or dataconsidered by the expert in forming their opinions, and the expert’s qualifications. Experts arestrictly prohibited from testifying on direct or redirect examination about any opinions orconclusions not stated in their report, and such testimony must be excluded upon a timelyobjection from opposing counsel. For example, an expert may not testify on direct or redirectexamination that they formed a conclusion based on evidence that came out during trial that theexpert did not previously review. However, if an expert is asked during cross-examination aboutmatters not contained in their report, the expert may freely answer the question as long as theanswer is responsive.","State v. Dawson":". Appellants admit that the defense expert was attempting totestify to certain underlying facts that were not expressly disclosed in the expert report and thatsuch facts contributed to the expert's conclusion, but they argue that the conclusion itself wasdisclosed and thus it was unnecessary for every underlying detail to be disclosed. We believe thatthe Appellants' argument has merit. Experts should not be expected to include in their reportsevery basic scientific fact and known realities that support their conclusion. Such a requirementwould lead to expert reports that are hundreds, if not thousands, of pages long. For example, anaccident reconstructionist need not explain Newton’s laws of motion in her report. However, ifan expert wishes to testify that they believe the indentations on a vehicle’s door means that thevehicle collided with a streetlamp at 45 MPH, then measurements, equations, and other relevantfacts that form the basis for that specific conclusion must be disclosed in the expert’s report.Reversed and remanded to the trial court for reconsideration consistent with this decision.HearsayAmerica’s Best Cookie v. International House of Waffles (2009)The Court recognizes that practices differ in other jurisdictions. But, in Midlands, the definitionof “hearsay” includes out-of-court statements by a witness who is on the stand or by anotherperson who has or will be testifying in a particular trial.","State v. Hsi":"MRE 801(d)(2) may be invoked in only one direction in a criminal case. Specifically, MRE801(d)(2) permits the State to offer statements by a criminal defendant. Subject to MRE 106,MRE 801(d)(2) does not permit the defense to offer the defendant’s own statements, even if theState has already elicited other out-of-court statements by a defendant during a precedingexamination.","Branham v. Chancellor":"For purposes of MRE 801(d)(2), police officers, prosecutors, informants, and others workingwith law enforcement officials are not an “opposing party” of a criminal defendant.State v. Al Ekri (2012)The business-records hearsay exception (MRE 803(6)) cannot be used to “back door” evidencethat would not be admissible in a criminal case under the public-records hearsay exception ofMRE 803(8)(ii).","State v. Orr":"A public record of a criminal conviction is not a police report and, thus, is not excluded by MRE803(8)(A)(ii).","State v. Brew":"MRE 801(d)(2) governs statements “offered against an opposing party.” This rule does notrequire the proponent of the evidence to offer the statement “against the party’s interests” inorder to qualify as an exemption to hearsay under MRE 801(d)(2)—that language is notably onlyfound in MRE 804(b)(3). If the drafters of the MRE had wanted 801(d)(2) to only apply if thestatement was “against the party’s interest,” it would have drafted the rule as such."}